# Civilizing Space (Musée des Arts Decoratifs et du Design - Bordeaux)
## Octave de Gaulle

Born in 1987. Lives and works in Paris.

In 2007, Octave de Gaulle enrolled in the ENSCI-Les Ateliers (the Advanced National School of Industrial Creation). He carried his studies at the Politecnico in Milan and the Köln International School of Design (Cologne). In 2013, his final dissertation On a marché sur la tête [We Walked on the Head] as well as his project Distiller One, enabled him to obtain a summa cum laude degree.

In 2014, the MADD decided to support Octave de Gaulle in the development of his project, and offered him an exhibition at the end of 2015. With the museum's help, he joined the artist's residency programme at the CNES (National Center for Space Studies) - Space Observatory, and continues his research work and his professional activity within the Space Agency, cofouned with British designer Matt Sindall.

## Design for Space

The question of what happens in the heavens **has intrigued humanity since the earliest days**. It runs through history, making no distinction between civilisations, until taking a much more concrete form in the latter half of the 20th century. The significant efforts made by governments during **the Second World War assively mobilised scientists, industrialists and the military** to complete projects involving rocket-powered weapons systems, thus giving rise to major scientific progress towards the conquest of space, a subject that would fascinate humankind from then on.

Today, the advent of space tourism, the prospect of a mission to Mars and the boom in civil orbital aviation all invite us to radically **re-think the spaces and objects that enable us to live in space**. Like the maritime, automobile and aeronautical industries in their day, we will soon be witnessing a concomitant change in the space industry. A transition towards a **civilian Space Age**.

> Designers have to come forward and to ask themselves questions about the potential of this huge field of opportunity, about a ew way of looking at space, its needs and its unprecedent challenges, knowing that they are in possession of a considerable part of the answer. Indeed, the lack of privacy, conviviality, the isolation, the separation from Earth or the comfort on board are new decisive challenges that arise from cultural considerations, and not from scientific ones. To enter those still-undiscovered domains, to question our knowledge, our certainties, our habits - all this is an inseparable part of the designer's profession.

Since his first years of studies at the ENSCI-Les Ateliers (the Advanced National School of Industrial Creation), Octave de Gaulle has been highlighting these new challenges as part of his Distiller One project. He is **one of the first designers of his generation** to explore this domain, which is largely still ignored by his fellow professionals.

## ESSOR II

ESSOR is a **research progrem focusing on spacecraft interiors** and habitability. The study if exclusively conducted using **full-scale models** that allow both the **conception and representation** of the habitat of a space environment.

Disregarding the up/down order of things, i.e. leaving out verticality, turns out to be rather difficult using only hand drafting or 3D moelling. Indeed, when it comes to space, the residents don't live on surfaces: instead, **they occupy the entire volume of a habitat**. This means that they can move in any direction and reach any surface: there's no such thing as ceilings o floors, chairs or beds or the *right* or *wrong* **orientation**. And this is where full-scale models prove to be very helpful, since a model can be flipped, hung upside down and even explored from inside.

> Using a full-scale moel allows me to correct, resize or adjust objects and environments I've previously drawn. As an example, if I realise a handle is hard to reach from a certain point, I have to rethink its shape or position in order to guarantee its total usefulness. Once inside the model, you understand much better what is essential and well placed, and what is not. Actually, it is from inside the model that you're the most creative. In a way, ESSOR is a sort of gigantic sketchbook: first, I start with simple lines building from cheap wooden battens. Then, I adjust, draw, set distances, daw again, fine-tune... and, little by little, the final shapes begin to appear as I layer the structure and the different elements of the habitat.

ESSOR 2 introduces a **table as the pivotal point of the habitat**. More than just simple objects to lay things on, tables intend to structure social life here on Earth. That is, tables can almost be considered as architectural elements: we dine, face each other, discuss, work on it. Men and women organise their entire lives around tables. Thus, when traditional bearings such as floors or walls disappear, **social markers** like tables become essential **to organise and orientate a space**.

## Distiller One

During the 70 years since the beginning of the space age, we have made space travel almost commonplace, we have succeeded in putting research laboratories in orbit and even in walking on the Moon. Yet all these devices created to take humans in Space are merelely survival capsules. **Austere and functional**, they are designed to cater only to our **physiological needs**.

Since 2013, Octave de Gaulle has dedicated himself to the design and study of objects and environments that accompany humans in space. He measures the gap between how we imagine life in space to be and the crude reality of the existing installations. To this end, he has decided to create **his own "space program"** that aspires to find the ideal forms that would allow us to really live in space, and not just to survive there. This program, named Distiller One, is the main project of his graduation.

> The ambition of Distiller was to conceive forms that will allow human culture to express itself in space. At the moment, the stations in orbit and the objects at our disposal there were mostly conceived by military engineers. They make it possible for human beings to survive biologically, but they were not designed to offer comfort, or, indeed, any art-de-vivre. Yet, a human being is more than a sum of the biological functions! That's why the aim was to understand what makes ituals and experiences pleasant, enjoyable or convivial on Earth and to find the right forms to recreate it in space. The conditions of weightlesness radically change our relationship to objects! The direction, the weight of things or their capacity to stay where we put them disappear completely. However, weightlesness doesn't change our social nature, our need for conviviality or our sensitivity to beauty.

These questions gave birth to the desire to create a real, all-encompassing research program. This program contains not only documentation, but also drawings, prototypes, scientific evaluations and test procedures. Distiller One was a project to design and create a wine bottle and glass that can be used in zero gravity. it offers the possibility, through these two objects, of **rediscovering in space the peasure and the conviviality** that characterise the sharing of a glass of wine.

## The myth of Capt. Hadock

The process of creation is the result of a variety of things: what's aleady out there, documentation and research, experiences, encounters... But there is always **a triggering factor** that is the result of the subjectivity of the person doing the creating: an element --- insignificat for everybody else --- but which has deep and particular meaning for them.

At the moment, the objects available to astronauts on board spacecraft are the same that we use on Earth, and that **we awkwardly try to adapt to the conditions in space**. So, we ass a length of string, a hook-and-eye fastener, a strip of adhesive tape or a strap, in order to fight against weightlesness. This kind of approach assumes that we have to **counter its effects**.

> We have to take the opposite approach and abandon the idea of adapting objects used on Earth to the conditions of life in space --- that's a negative approach. We should think instead about how to transpose them, that is, how to create objects that fulfil the same functions but in the specific conditions of weightlesness. The absence of gravity represents as many constraints as it does formal opportunities and techniques, we just have to choose to make use of them! This realisation occured to me as I was looking at a drawing in the comic book Tintin: Explorers on the Moon where you can see captain Haddock chasing after a bubble of whisky. This situation is funny, but also poetic and beautiful: this bubble that floats, rebounds, takes off... This is something we cannot recreate on Earth, but yet fascinates us. So why fight this beauty when we have the possibility of benefitting from it?

This is the course of action that Octave de Gaulle has taken: to create objects that **embrace the possibilities of life in Space**, the aim being to transpose our gestures and experiences on Earth. The forms he creates do not resemble anything we know, but they allow us to **regain the comfot of using** ergonomics and an intuitive relationship to an object. This is why he designed his wine bottle and "glass" around this particular state of a freely floating liquid.

## Raymond Loewy

The long and brilliant career of Raymond Loewy, the French-born American industrial designer, mirrored the history of the 20th century and its technical progress. Before being **appointed designer for NASA's Skylab space station** (1967-1973), Raymond Loewy gave form to anything that could roll, float or fly: transatlantic liners, streamline locomotives for the Pennsylvania railroad, as well as Studebaker automobiles and the Concorde and Air Force One. We also owe him the design of certain domestic objects that becamo a symbol of the American way of life.

Thanks to his rich experience in the design of both means of transport and of everyday objects, Raymond Loewy was **the first designer in history to cooperate on the design of the interior of a space vehicle** and to introduce the idea of comfort, which had been all-but ignored up until then.

> Between 1967 and 1973, Loewy's agency produced over 3000 drawings for NASA. They paid particular attention to the issues of hygiene, food, health and well-being in ero gravity. For example, he carefully considered the organisation of the very confined and constraining interiors of a space vehicle, so that you could have privacy in certain places, but also engage in social activities in others. He was also the first to suggest the idea of an on-board shower and to imagine a triangular table, to that no member of the crew would have the impression of dominating the others. His work has inspired me a lot.

Raymond Loewy's take on these spaces and objects are not strictly functional, because he pays a lot of attention to the **symbolic character of the elements** he is working on. he highlights the **necessity of creating a dedicated design language for space**, and of not just being satisfied with a simple adaptation of what exists on Earth.

## Aquarium

How do you pass over **from myth to reality**? From the fantastical image of the bubbles of liquid that we imagine spinning around in Space, to a technical and functional solutions? It is the designer's challenge to find a form, a material, a gesture that matches the best with **this new expression of a basic need**.

That is where, intuitively, **the drawing phase gives birth to forms** that are able to interact with the new form of the liquid: rounded, spiral planar objects with varying size. But **testing quickly becomes necessary** to find out how the drawing and the form influence the element. They ae as essential during the conception phase of the project as for the validation of the final object.

> The experiments in the aquarium were done in the very beginning of the project. At first, they were for understanding the spherical state of the liquid, rather than as an obligatory approval of every step of the project. From first assumptions to the final version, this test gave me a lot of information about what works and what doesn't work at all. The principle of this test is rather simple: I fill up a glass with oil, then I immerse it in a precisely measured mixture of water and alcohol, Oil is less dense than water, but more dense than alcohol. When my mixture of water and alcohol has the right density, the oil becomes a floating sphere, just like in space. Of course, simulation has its limits: the oil has its own weight, it doesn't have the viscosity of wine and moves a lot less easily in a liquid than in air, but it allows me visualise how the liquid interacts with a form.

One of the first tests allowed the designer to not only demonstrate the **uselessness of the glass receptacle** as we know it, but also to comprehend the technical challenges of managing liquids in weightlesness. With help of his own drawings and of the demonstration videos made by astronaut Don Pettit, Octave de Gaulle caried out **numerous tests on different foms** and improved the designs of his glass, which would also be tested in the aquarium.

## Reichelt

Setting of on the adventure that is space is no small undertaking. However, Ocatve de Gaulle's project shows us that space is accessible and, with a little igenuity and a basic understanding of the laws of physics, this understanding can be baced up by **the relevant scientific experiments**.

And example of the latter is the conception and design of a **free-fall device** that the designer christened *Reichelt*. Shaped like an artillery shell, this device was designed to be dropped from a certain height, thereby subjecting the objects that it contained to reduced gravity. On earth, weightlesness can only be achieved by using such a procedure, or during zero-gravity flights, where the spacecraft's trajectory simulates free-fall. For several seconds, **an on-board camera filmed the behaviour of liquids** under reduced gravity, simulating the conditions in space.

> Two versions of Reichelt were created, but the principle stayed the same: a housing equipped with a lighting system and a camera that filmed the prototype containers and th reactions of the liquids within them during the free fall. Reichelt 1, which resembled a rocket, was first launched from the cliffs at Étretat. It was amazing, but the drop wasn't long enough. We then dropped it from the ninth floor of my apartment building in Paris, but a slight error of trajectory meant that it didn't survive the landing. At the time, I really had the impression that I was part of a real space adventure: my first crash! Reichelt 2 was less pretty, but allowed us to capture some really good images that confirmed my hpothesis about the picnhing of the toroidal bottle.

Just like the aquarium experiment, Reichelt saw the designer **through various stages of reflection** and consideration: first, it allowed the testing of various types of folds, just by putting simple tubes inside, then, later, the confirmation of the correct shape for the bottle that would give an **optimal interaction with the liquid**. Simple, efficient and a little crazy, *Reichelt* became the symbol for the *Distiller One* adventure.

## The corner effect

In the absence of gravity, it is not only the weight of objects that is affected. Weightlesness also reveals **forces that are largely hidden on Earth** by the force of gravity. Amongst these forces, surface tension --- that is, when two surfaces meet, be they liquid, solid or gas --- can produce some surprising phenomena. **Liquids, for example, have the tendency to form themselves into spheres**, reducing their area of surface contact with the air to a minimum. And, when in contact with certain shapes or materials, these same liquids can either spread out thinly over a surface or be repelled by them.  The force of adhesion, the determining factor in this interaction depends on the solid, liquid or gas involved. So, in space, it is essential **to take into account the parameters** that govern the behaviour of fluids in zero gravity, even though they are practically immeasurable on Earth.

> Capillarity exists both on Earth and in space, and its strength doesn't vary between the two environments. It's a consequence of surface tension, and you can easily see it by plunging a small glass tube into some water: the level of the water rises slightly in the tube, since it prefers contact with the glass than with the air. It's the same phenomenon that makes the surface of wine rise up slightly where it comes int contact with the sides of a glass. It's only Earth's gravity that stops the water from climbing all the way up the tube, or the wine from creeping up the sides of the glass. In zero gravity, on the other hand, nothing holds this force back, so you have to work with it. A very interesting behaviour results from this physical phenomenon: the Corner Effect. The edges or folds that are impressed on the container increase its contact surface, permitting the retention of liquid, and even giving us the ability to control it!

The bottle that Octave the Gaulle has designed takes advantage of the Corner Effect, which is also used in the fuel reservoirs of satellites, the progressive narrowing of the bottle's wall, achieved by using a steel mould, means that the wine always moves toward the bottle's opening and never collects anywhere else in the volume. So that it only presented this single edge, the bottle is toroidal (ring shaped). The bottle can, therefore, be stored and refilled lying flat on Earth, while in zero gravity, the ring shape makes it easy to grab on to and to manipulate. it can even be carried around an arm or shoulder or hung up using a strap.

## Message in a bottle

It was after some **conversations with a submariner** that Octave de Gaulle realised the role of alcohol consumption in situations of confinement. A high ranking Navy official confided in him **the importance of this matter** when men have to stay in confined spaces for several months, far from dry land.

Alcohol can be a **remarkable vector of conviviality**, but it can also turn out to be **a considerable problem**. It is the way that you consume it that will determine if it is a happy, social moment or, on the contrary, a sad and solitary one. If we take wine as an example, on Earth, there is a series of objects, gestures and rites that make its consumption **a sophisticated experience, a moment of sharing** and not simply a basic, mechanical activity of ingesting alcohol. But what about in space?

> The question is: do we want to drink the wine straight from the neck of the bottle, everybody with their own plastic bottle and straw, or do we want to recreate this conviviality? The bottle is not simply packaging, its shape determines the festures associated with the rite of serving it, the preservation of the wine's aroma --- the whole tasting experience. It offers the possibility of sharing something: we open it, we serve, we close it, we serve again... It's the very opposite of an individual sachet: it carries with it a social dimension, whila an individual sachet passes on the idea of rationing, or even a dose of medicine.

And let's not forget that a bottle --- especially a wine bottle --- has an aesthetic requirement and **responds to certain codes**. So the label, inseparable from the bottle, shows the vineyard, the vintage and gives you information about what you are about to drink, as well as about the wine's production methods. **Preservation of the identification** codesgives us the ability to break wth the forms that we already know, all the while preserving **the spirit of the object**.

## Ceci n'est pas un verre

When we use **the word "glass"**. We instinctively think of a certain type of container, one used for **containing liquid and transporting it to our mouths**. But, in zero gravity, liquids naturally form spheres and do not flow. The containers that we are used to using are ill-suited to this environment. At the moment, astronauts drink from **small sachets, sucking the liquid up through a straw**. This is a good enough solution for drinking water, for example, but it is diametrically opposed to the **terrestrial rituals and moments of conviviality** associated with the taste and appreciation of wine, which is what Octave de Gaulle wants to take into space.

> These days, drinking on board space stations doesn't really represent any particular challenge. However, drinking alcohol from the current plastic pouches ruins everything that's good about drinking wine. To see this, you only have to look at present-day wine glasses, which are the product of centuries of refinement: they enhance the wine, and the balloon-shaped bowl, which has become larger and more open over time, is a testament to the importance of the sense of smell in appreciating wine. Today, we drink out of glasses that direct this bouquet directly to our noses... So it was necessary to find a form that, in contrast to the straw, preserves this olfactory aspect of wine consumption. On top of that, even if, on Earth, we confine out liquids to containers so that they don't spill everywhere, nothing, really obliges us to do the same thing in Space.

This utensil, this "glass", allows you **to capture, using a steel loop, a sphere of wine** that has just escaped from the bottle. The loop is enamelle in order to remain taste-neutral and to simulate contact with glass. on one side of the loop, a stem allows the user to grab hold of the glass, and to move it, **raise it to the mouth**, inspect it or just let the wine breathe. on the other side are two thin, overlapping blades, where you can rest your lips (the blades are not sharp). The look and feel of this "spout" recalls that of a woodwind instrument, **a familiar and comfortable form**. This spout has, furthermore, the property of channeling the liquid contained in the loop towards the mouth, allowing the consumption of every last drop.
